and believe it or not he used to mail me just through the mail these very rare pamphlets really he was quite a character apparently i've just heard from a second hand source at the earth credit society about brigham and hunting because huntington will be he was one of these collectors who bought on block of course and probably didn't know what he was buying probably
Well, who knows?
Well, someone is doing a life of Huntington.
Yes, a Dickinson.
And Dickinson talked to somebody at the Antiquarian Society, and he was very interested in some correspondence between Brigham and Huntington.
Yeah, well, what happened is apparently some people in England did not want to sell any more things to Huntington, so there was correspondence that indicates that he used Brigham to buy stuff for him.
I wonder if that was part of it.
Because most of these great, like more of them, their great collections were formed by Claridge.
Really?
You had Dickinson's book on the collection.
I do, yes.
And the preceding book.
And the canon book was very important.
They were really formed by Claridge.
So I'll tell you about some of the people I've talked to.
It's really, it's very exciting.
So half of the book will be history, of course.
But I think the most exciting part, section, will be the contemporary people who haven't really
been written about to a great extent.
I mean, you have written about yourself, certainly, and everybody in the book all knows who you are.
Well, certainly the second part will be the most avidly read.
I think so.
In fact, I was with Colin Franklin.
He's wonderful.
And he said, I should do an old book after I outlined what I was doing for him.
And he said, you know, this history's been done.
And I said, well, yeah, but
other people don't know what it really hasn't been related and i am looking for a continuum i mean you say in your books um you give books new life i mean you pass them on people are just custodians for the moment so we're temporary so if we can kind of give some sense of this this renewal as a matter of fact one of the criticisms of the book of old and rare was why didn't you
write about your American control, your colleagues.
Well, we didn't.
We purposely did.
Well, it was a little difficult.
That never even occurred to me, to be honest with you.
Yeah, we did.
We mentioned them.
In the first edition, we mentioned some of them very long ways.
But things happen, and there's a different relationship between a farm dealer where you're not as close.
So you want to keep clean and clear.
So we did.
So somebody should mention them.
And there are many worthy of being mentioned.
With whom else have you worked?
I spent a delightful afternoon with... I don't think this is online.
That was the orthopedist.
Well, we had a very interesting experience.
Oh, this was years ago.
And my father had been a physician, and about three months after he died, oh, whatever, doesn't that.
And my leg bothered me very much.
I wanted to see the sort of paper stuff in the bronze.
And he was very nice, and blah, blah, blah, blah.
And I said, Dr. Borstein, I would like your, you know, your fee.
What do I owe you?
He said, I should charge the daughter of Dr. Rockford.
Don't be ridiculous.
He said, but I know you're in the book first.
and send me, give me some books of my kibbutz.
Well, he's not a kibbutz, he has established a long library in Nahariya.
I said, well, it was a kibbutz.
I said, Dr. Bernstein, we don't really have books, appropriate books.
I mean, for kids to go with.
He said, never mind, I'll be the judge of that.
So what can I say?
He's been very kind.
And I said, well, come down.
We'll go to the house in the Bronx.
I said, come here.
Well, Manny was ready to throw me out of the third floor window.
He selected a 1548
French deep grammar, another Renaissance book, and a very rare book book.
Robinson Gate to the Holy Land, which we have.
17th century English book, and then the Boudinot Star of Israel.
Star of the West.
Star of the West, a presentation copy to the President of the United States.
I said, oh my God, why do we have all these good books?
As adults, kids in a carboots, they want to read Gone with the Wind or something.
Well, I said, it was not a matter of good.
I said, Dr. Burton, I hope that they'll enjoy the blah blah blah.
About six weeks later, he found these a massage room.
My librarian wrote something, and he said, you know, these are wonderful books.
They're not for a carboots.
I sent them
to the University of Jerusalem.
And they're in the rare book room.
We did our bit.
I hope they're still there.
Yeah, I hope they're still there.
But, you know, the desire to acquire books is so insisting, especially among the Germans.
I have found this, I have really found this in my study, in that
A large percentage of the people, and I'm doing this not randomly, I'm not designing this by ethnic group or racial group or sex, but it's turning out that really an inordinate percentage of people I'm talking to are Jewish.
And the Jews are the people of the book, it turns out, and the reverence of the book.
It's really quite extraordinary.
It's real.
It was not that way for me when we began as young people.
It used to be a custom among Jewish people, I don't know if you know this or not, to put a little honey on the book.
I didn't know that.
When my aunt taught me what we saw, and she said, I'm going to put a little honey on the book because writing is so sweet.
And it's lovely.
Well, young Aaron told me that when a book is really can't be used anywhere, they actually have funeral services.
They have actually had a service.
This is the New York Public Library.
A few other libraries should hear about it.
Instead of that, what they do is microfilm and then throw the original out.
That's right.
When I was at Oxford, it was interesting.
We were talking about the Cervantes.
I love this story.
Well, remember at the last auction, where Quaritch paid a million and a half, not this Bradley Martin, but the garden sale.
A million and a half, 1.65, and went back to Spain.
So Julian Roberts at Oxford said, well, you know, we bought our Cervantes when it was issued.
They had a book flyer in Spain.
Have you any clue to Provo and Powers who's buying this book?
Yes.
Piri, I think.
Robert Piri, who's sitting right behind me.
That's my best deal.
He's sitting right here with the group.
P-I-R-I-E.
He's president of the Rothschild Bank.
And also Henri Schiller got the utopia.
but he was over for the sale.
There were four sitting in the Quaritch group.
That's right.
There was Arthur Freeman and Paul Wilson.
And behind them were two men.
One of them was Robert Peary, and the other one was Andre Schiller.
Are they the English Schiller?
Peary is American.
Sure.
And he's a big guy.
In fact, I went up to him at the sale.
Where is he located?
Here.
Here you are.
But he has always, he's actually recently a member of the Rocksburg Court, along with Lady Echols.
What did he draw?
I believe, no I don't know, but I believe he brought the Shakespearean.
Did they listen to the priest?
The priest, perhaps.
Well, when the bidding started, were you there?
Because I was looking for you to, and I wanted to talk to you, and you left.
But I walked right up to them.
I stood as close to them as I'm standing.
I mean, I wanted this particular... I know Richard Manning was interested in it.
I talked to Richard Manning, by the way.
He was the one who bought the Shakespeare's for $2 million.
His dealer was Jim Cummins, who was sitting up in the balcony.
So he dropped out.
So I know it wasn't Manny.
And then, of course, Quaritch won, and everybody was shaking hands, and Peary was shaking hands.
Now, that's my guess.
I don't know that.
Well, I think it's a very educative.
But I think it's probably who bought it.
But Quaritch, how do you feel about this?
Let's talk about that.
I think it's a little bit of national noise.
Well, sure.
But on the other hand, these are books that belong in England.
But I don't think they're all going back to England.
See, I even have that in my notebook.
I said, well,
at least maybe england is bringing some of its national treasures back but i don't think that's really the case that's going to france that's going to france what i object to it is having these american millionaires uh billionaires uh instead of an american i've always objected it is rumored and i'll say this before machine if he bought home or bought from rosenberg was bought from quarish too but he bought a lot from rosenberg
Well, this guy Peary, for instance, bought a lot from John Plummer.
But when it came to auction, he always bought at auction and continues to buy through Quaritch.
I think it discourages.
It makes no sense.
If you read, say, about the sale of the newspaper, and you're a young, hopeful buyer, collector, you withdraw.
You say, ah, bunch of snobs, bunch of millionaires, I don't have a breath.
Well, that's very expensive books.
In general, you can say that.
I think you two women have proved that you don't have to have.
No, you don't.
I don't have.
What I have learned from your books is that you're both scholars.
Very interesting books.
When we came home, Leona said to me, oh, I wish we could have had.
I said, 10 million to relax.
And I said, you know, honestly, I am more excited by a much lesser book in which we can discover.
Well, you know what excites me?
When you talk about going to these basements in England,
and discovering in a cellar, literally in a cellar, something that has... But this is something that you're using your knowledge and your perception.
That to me is what collecting is.
That's perception.
That's the secret.
I mean, this is one reason to collect, really.
I'm more impressed by the guy who found Tamerlane for $15 in a pile of junk.
than the guy who spent $200,000 for him, which happened to be picked Manny, by the way.
You don't find him today.
You can't.
He did, though.
And that could have been me, because I don't live very far from Murray.
Look, it's not as possible as it used to be, but it's still possible.
Look, you know, Manny's a great author to follow me.
And we developed an orchid collection at one of the universities.
Which university was that big?
Brigham Young.
And we were given a bid at, I think it was the way it was the Browning Law.
At the other, the American Army Center.
The January, so.
The 2,000 for Flower Fables, which is Louise Orchid's first book.
Okay.
It's quite uncommon.
Now, what happened, the university?
You said bid up to 2,000.
It went to 22 days.
Of course, House B and me was commissioned.
We didn't get it.
So, right after New York, a young dealer came up and said, oh, I have a copy.
Blah, blah, blah, blah, let you have it.
Blah, blah, blah, blah.
Little lad says, I have a copy.
I have a copy.
So, to make a long story short, we got the copy, and we told the librarian, who was delighted,
You wouldn't have to pay the house fee, etc.
That's nice.
That's really exciting.
We sent it to him.
He had the book.
The computer had medical stuff.
Nothing had a case like that, though.
We are such good friends.
He volunteered.
Nothing happened except that we said return the book.
And he said, but I want to pay for it anyway, and when you sell the copy, then you'll remunerate me.
And we said, no, we can't accept the book value and the money.
It just goes against the grain.
He said, tear being worse and return the book.
And the moral is, virtue was rewarded, because I'm doing a lot of Louisa Orkett editorial work there with two men from the Carolinas,
And I told the story to him.
One of them is at the University of North Carolina in Charlotte, the English department.
And he said, our library doesn't have it.
And I would love it to be there.
And then they buy it.
So it works out.
The moral of this, too, is, so wild fables cost quite a wonder.
You could still find wild fables.
in some sort of antique shop in Maine or New Hampshire.
Looks like nothing.
You could buy it for $2.
Oh, and the dream on the cake was, I did a lovely article.
She did a model.
Because I got so interested in it.
But the point is, it's acceptable.
It doesn't come out.
It'll be out in November in the A.B.
when children are afraid.
But this could happen when you say finding books.
Excuse me just a minute.
The story of the book is very exciting, and the publishers, nothing was known about the publishers.
And I discovered that one of them got himself murdered here in New York.
It makes a beautiful story.
It makes a great story.
So you're a detective, as you point out in the book, too.
Yeah, well, that's the point.
You see, finding early proof of books, a dealer today is scared to death, so he overcharges.
You mind saying, Miss Dax, who knows very little,
By chance, he finds a book printed in line in 1618, a Putin press book I'm referring to.
He would be scared to death to price it as a sensible price.
He would price it at $3,000, $4,000, $5,000.
Because he thinks, he doesn't know what it is, but it must be great, it must be important because he printed in line in 1618.
Lied in hundreds of books.
You see, it used to be, when a dealer
didn't know anything about a book, he would underpriced it.
But he did.
If he doesn't know anything about it, he underpriced it.
And there are so many young dealers who really, I'm sorry to say, know very much.
Well, they don't know the languages, and this is another hell.
They have to deal in what?
Englishlet or money?
Englishlet first.
What do you think about the new generation of dealers?
Don't ask me.
Well, a few of them are very good.
There are a few who are very good scholars.
But a lot of them, they take their cartons and they swept them from one fair to another.
The only thing they change, the carton is in worse condition, and the prices are higher.
Now, you two were quite instrumental in starting book fairs, which I think.
I chaired the committee that started the group.
Which I think has revolutionized book collecting to the point that more people now collect.
In fact, I'm on the board of the Friends of Brother's Library, Clark, and we're having our first one next month.
Where?
At Clark University.
Oh, sure.
I'm some of the board up there.
Do you know Mansa by his husband?
I don't know him.
He's a very knowledgeable one.
He really is.
He's very good.
In his field.
He's interesting books.
He's better known outside of Worcester than he is in Worcester.
When Worcester would collect and cannabulate him.
But he's very good.
And I will be doing a story on him.
Anyway, let's talk about, if we could talk generally about your love for you.
No, you don't collect yourselves, I don't think, do you?
Well, we collect along the lines of what we happen to be writing.
Like Francis Parkman, for instance.
Well, I don't know what I'm saying.
Now, Leona would collect Hook while she was working on the Hook book.
I will collect Louise May Orton while I'm working on her.
But then when we're through, we tend to get rid of those books to make room for all these.
It's a question of space, too.
So that we're not really collectors.
We're really bastard collectors, I would say.
So the satisfaction for the two of you, then, is what?
In building collections for other people?
Or making sure that the books are well taken care of?
And finding interesting on common books.
satisfying the needs of certain libraries.
We're 90% libraries.
You know, Morgan's old dictum, put the right book in the right place.
And that's what we like to do.
And we know the needs of certain libraries, and we try to build them.
And try to develop other collectors.
Do you ever kind of, you mentioned a lot of the great stuff is gone, but on the other hand,
There must be new areas to collect.
Now, you said one of your chapters here, feminism is collectable.
Well, if there came a point, Lisa Baskin, who I interviewed, speaks to both of you.
Lisa and Leonard .
They're very good.
I'm sure they are.
They're wonderful, wonderful collection.
They've never talked about their book.
I'm sorry.
They have enormous enthusiasm.
I call them, they are my example of the synergistic
collection of it because they really feed on each other to sit with them and to listen to the tape they actually finish each other's sentences and they in complete sentences it's almost like they anticipate each other's thoughts and you see this excitement and this enthusiasm and Leonard will talk about going to a fair or anywhere and seeing something which he has never heard of before but he knows instantly what it is
and how important it is.
You have to feel for it.
If you see, since we had a Catholic art from Germany the day before yesterday, there were quite a few small items in it, but we knew that these items, we could mold them, that they are something we can use.
It related to the Emperor Charles V.
his coronation and procession and all that stuff.
It makes a picture.
It makes a story of Charles V. And this is what you have to feel.
You have to have a feeling for a book.
You can't just, I mean, you can go from catalog after catalog and you're left cold, but all of a sudden,
There it is.
Something jumps out and you have to make that connection.
Making connections is the thing.
That's it.
This is what it's all about.
Perception is another way of putting it.
Connecting one thing with another.
This is the excitement, really.
And you get excited.
And then you say, I know who will want that book.
Is that kind of the thought?
We have a pamphlet inside.
It looks like nothing.
And we opened it up, and there it was.
We saw it immediately.
It was by Cosina de' Medici.
Really?
And then it followed through in some of the great Florence.
It's a reflection.
It's a comparison of the learning of a 17th century French humanist with early humanists.
And the whole picture is there.
So it recreates two periods.
And you can get as excited about it.
It made a pamphlet.
A little pamphlet.
As you can about an illustrated folio, a gorgeous illustrated folio.
Well, you mentioned the tracks.
That's real.
There we are.
Matty was looking at a track the other day.
It was written by somebody, Christopher of Portugal.
We never heard of him.
We found out who he was.
Apparently, he met with Elizabeth and his voice.
So the book is great and great.
That's a tiny little segment.
Well, it's a fragment of history, isn't it?
Yes, the Armada.
He mentioned all of this.
Where did you find all this?
We had ordered this from a French catalog.
But I mean, then how did you make the historic connections?
Well, we did it.
Oh, but you did your research.
We did.
We were reading.
And she was leaving through it, and these names hopped out.
Wally, Drake.
You don't mean anything more.
That's a big apple.
Contemporary reference, yeah.
It's just as we had a pamphlet.
And we're looking and looking, and I see the name Draco.
It's an Italian name, Draco.
Where's Draco?
The Spaniards said, it's Drake.
And it was all about the treatment of the Indians
in Spanish America.
This was the Americana and the treatment, or the barbarians, the treatments of the Indians by the Spanish in Mexico or wherever, in Central America.
So these little things, to rehearse in the cutable is important.
What can you say about Thomas Wines that hasn't been said?
Probably something.
Oh, the Nuremberg Chronicle that hasn't been said.
I mean, Shakespeare folio never hasn't been said.
Only Shakespeare folio, but everything has been said.
That's right.
Well, you know what I've seen?
It's stated.
Almost as recently as this morning, because I was coming down, and I had a little time, and I went through the haven,
I went through the Beinecke, of course, and I'll be doing my interviews there shortly, and I went over to see the Child Passive Exhibit, which is wonderful.
But, you know, I saw perhaps my seventh Gutenberg Bible of the last two months.
You know, I saw it.
I've been to Texas, and of course I've seen the one at Harvard, and I've handled Mr. Scheide's, and I've seen the one at the British Library, and I've seen it in the New York public, and everybody's got a Gutenberg Bible on that, as wonderful as it was.
I'm not belittling it in any way.
Well, it is.
But everybody certainly knows the value and the importance of the Gutenberg Bible.
I'm really impressed when you make discoveries that haven't been made.
Well, that's the point.
That's the point.
That's the point, as far as we're concerned.
I mean, to deal in modern firsts, the importance of H30 with a drop of J, I find an awful bore.
But it's the easiest thing for a Gutenberg.
young dealer who has no foreign background, no language training, he cannot manage early books.
You have to have training.
And I've always said that a dealer, to be a good dealer, you should have more French.
You should be exposed to books just as a young intern is exposed to medicine before he starts out.
He has to be grown into medicine.
You can have all the fancy training.
Look, I had a marvelous education, but I didn't know books until I had a very stern teacher.
Well, you called it Siberian.
It was Siberian.
For a race for a grad, it sure was.
But involuntarily, I was exposed so much.
I've been an idiot.
Look, I studied in Straussburg.
I worked for my PhD, but it was with the book.
And from Reischner, Fingerspitzengefühl, that really made me a ramble.
What was that expression you just said?
Fingerspitzengefühl.
It's the feeling at your fingertips.
Electricity in the fingertips.
Your fingertips.
How would you spell it?
That's a good question.
Fingerspitzen is one word.
F-I-N-G-E-R.
Okay.
That's one word.
S-P-I-T-Z-E-N.
G-E, I don't know about that.
G-E-F-U-E-H-L.
Okay.
It's the end of the end.
You bring it to it.
Your sensation, it really is.
That's very important.
I know if I come to it and... It could take me a day to figure out.
It's what happens when you spy a book that either you know it's exciting and the other dealer doesn't, or you have
It's a sudden feeling you're going to find something like that, but it's almost an odd-called feeling.
I mean, you said to yourself, there must be a mention, say, of the Pilgrims, or the Armada, or whatever, or... I want to show you just how you felt it.
So it is your feeling, then, that there are still many, many, many great things out there remaining to be discovered.
Excuse me.
Would you agree with that?
I don't know whether there's...
I'm sure there are still that you can still prowl around in small French towns and find stuff.
I don't know about Paris.
We just bought five very interesting books from a French dealer in Tours.
Now, we haven't even opened the Kings movies, but they all look delicious.
There will be stuff in them.
Two of them we've had, but the others look very good.
And I'm sure there's stuff going on.
I know there's stuff going on.
So you're kind of buying this on a hunch, then, that there's going to be stuff going on.
Well, you have to be a gambler.
I mean, we know a very good young dealer.
This dealer will not take a chance.
You have to take a chance.
You have to be a sport.
What would I say?
Not a gambler, but you have to risk.
You have to risk your money.
I mean...
Now, you mentioned that your primary work is with libraries and institutions.
Now, do they come to you and say, we're trying to develop a collection here, or we're looking for titles, or do they just kind of depend on you to tell them what you have?
One way or the other, we may suggest, why don't you start a collection
of all deans, or why don't you start a collection of Louisa Mayorka?
Would you be interested?
Now, if they've got a good education department or a pedagogical one of it, they would be interested in that.
And as it turned out, Brigham Young was interested, and they have a wonderful collection.
First editions, angry prints, secondary sources, autographed letters,
Would you say that this came largely as a result of your suggesting to them?
I would say so.
Who would I talk to there?
Could I call somebody there and have them talk?
Absolutely, Dean Larson.
Mr. A. Dean Larson, the L-A-R-S-E-N.
He's head of special collections.
Well, he's more than that.
He's assistant director of the library, actually.
But he's a darling, and he will certainly vouch for it.
What I want is to have him say, yes, we wouldn't have this.
He doesn't talk, though.
No, he might.
Oh, you never know.
This is an issue of Frank Leslie's illustration.
And that's 1886, isn't it?
1866.
And this is an anonymous story that I happen to know.
It's by Louisa Mayorka.
The title is The Freak of a Genius, Chapter 5, A Double Danger.
If I see this, I get just as excited as if somebody else... Now, where did you find this?
And I found this, but I think it was in a bus fair.
Really?
Yeah.
Now, how did you know it was Louisa Bell?
That's it.
She knows.
Now, I was saying, I would say this.
Say, not a place like The Young Young, but they know what they have.
But say a young library, say one of the branch libraries of Berkeley, California.
Say they had a pile of early printed books all over the place.
in special collections.
They have books in French, they have books in German.
They have books.
They're rare books.
But if you can direct their cataloguing and arranging these rare books, say they have in French books 25 published by the firm of Estienne, which is a great French printer.
If you can help assemble an Estienne book, if they have enough material
they will then begin to branch out and specialize in different segments.
And to do it in an imaginative way.
Or they have Luther.
Say they have 20 books on the German Reformation.
Say 20 books of Luther.
They will begin to see the light and say, well, we have a Reformation collection.
And we want to develop it now.
They can feed us.
So they'll go off on that tangent.
Come to them cold, some universities, a University of Winnipeg or something, with dirty books on the recognition.
They may be interested in capital or something.
If they keep your books on the recognition.
But they have to have some familiarity, because a lot of universities, librarians or assistant librarians, they don't know over much the middle of a bad way to draw.
I just saw an item in the Hampshire Gazette, which is out in Western Massachusetts, and there's a dealer out there, and I can't recall his name, and I'm an overly, well, it's interesting.
I mean, I don't approve of nuclear weapons.
No, and nor does he, but he thought it was a collection.
But it is a collection.
But I think a couple of dealers have done that.
Now, since Breger at the AAS has told me about
a guy he worked for out in Sacramento, and I can remember his name.
He was a big, big man with about 380 pounds, I don't know who he is.
But he decided out in the West Coast, Sacramento, California, I think.
Right, that's not important.
But he did decide that nobody had ever collected all of these pulp magazines, which are spin-offs, from TV sitcoms.
And so he put this thing together and sold it to, like, the University of New Mexico.
Well, it's the grandchild of the darn novel, I know.
Do you want to take your jacket off?
No, I'm not fine, thank you.
Mary and I did the introduction to a book published by Macmillan on Special Collections.
And we were not the editors, we just did the instructions.
The editors got all the information, all the slides,
Well, we just couldn't believe the things that people... This was a book... One on Arabian horses.
We have just one copy.
That's fine.
I'm doing all my stuff.
One.
They have copies of everything.
What were they collecting on Arabian horses?
No kidding.
I mean, it's just California with all the nonsense.
Was this kind of a textbook?
This is a good reference book.
We can't get it now.
We're talking about it a little bit.
Well, we can't get it, but they can.
But I could buy it.
I just want to see the title of it.
Oh.
Special Collections and Colleges and University Libraries.
When was it published?
Last year.
88.
88 of the college.
Special Collections and Colleges.
Yeah, Macmillan.
89.
89, and we did it in 88.
You had no idea what it was collected.
I think I need this book.
What does it cost out of curiosity?
$90.
I can get it.
I mean, when you think of it.
I can get these for cost.
Just the specialist list of the, do you have the ABAA?
Yes.
You have it, then you just look at the back, what do you list?
Specialized.
This would be very interesting for me to find out.
Well, it's non-comprehensive.
A lot of big libraries did not answer the question they had.
They didn't want to be bothered.
I don't think Harvard did.
But I know what they collect anyway.
But you know what they don't hear.
But a lot of small libraries answered.
books on coconuts.
I mean, I'm being sarcastic, but that's about the size.
There was another... Well, official collections in colleges and universities.
Yes, that we did an introduction for from Macmillan that might interest you.
Okay, your names are on there.
Who was the editor on that, by the way?
Well, a place called M-O-G-A-R-K.
M-O-G-A-R-K.
Burgess, B-U-R-G-E-S-S.
He's in Santa Monica.
I think my teacher...
That's very useful.
I can get books at first.
I think I have that.
That's a Macmillan book.
Yeah, I have that.
And some of these profiles are interesting.
But the new breed of dealers, they're few very good ones, but most of them.
Who were some of the... Well, you know, when I interviewed Ed Wolfe, I went to Philadelphia, and he worked for Rosenbach, of course, and he was related to him.
He was kind of groomed to be the successor, and of course, then he had the falling out with Philip, of course.
Well, I saw him in January, he looked wonderful.
He was ill, but when I saw him in January, he looked wonderful.
But he did say that he thought that Krauss was more knowledgeable than Rosenbach.
And I've told people that they can't believe they would say that.
I think Krauss probably was a little more knowledgeable surgeon.
But not an American.
No way.
He might have done well with Krauss.
No.
You don't think so, huh?
I think that Rosenbach...
Look, Rosenbach knew his English literature and American literature.
His PhD in English literature.
And that's earned.
People don't realize it.
Dr. Oh, there's no doubt about it.
His PhD was earned, you know.
Oh, yes, it was earned.
He earned it.
Certainly earned it.
I love that story.
Yeah, that's a great story.
It wasn't a great story.
No, I mean, that man just never relented, did he?
Oh, it was one day?
No, there was no way to attempt to make him relate.
She was asked, when she came up again, you know, and the whole thing was renewed, why didn't you change your supervisor as you were today?
Well, you couldn't possibly change your supervisor.
You had a supervisor, you didn't like him, you weren't.
That's right, you're stuck.
Well, whatever.
But you must have had a little stubbornness in you, too, though.
Oh, I was difficult.
I was a fresh kid.
And I wanted to do what I wanted to do.
Actually, the way it turned down... Now, my parents, of course, were very sad, and, of course, I went through a lot.
If I had gotten a degree at the time, I probably would have toured media history in some small town in Oklahoma.
In Mississippi.
Very homesick.
In my life would have been that a small town that I do.
I think that ultimately you would have come to Brooksville.
Do you think so?
I don't think so.
I never would have landed in the local business.
This was no sportsman.
Well, I love this story about the stationary and the welcome sign.
Well, the way it turned out, it turned out marvelous.
I didn't know it at the time.
And it was really awful that the U.S.
Paul put to this then head of manuscripts on American history at the A.P.A.
Publisher that's a dolly man, and he was very sorry about it.
And he told me about Rajni.
He said, this guy needs a job.
He needs somebody.
He's a refugee.
And then when I went up to Rajni, his English was very haughty at the time, I said, well, I do speak German.
Of course, we've done it tremendously.
But unfortunately, I lit a cigarette, and I didn't do anything.
But you couldn't smoke.
Well, I've been describing you to people who are really interested in my book and what I'm talking to you.
And I say that you two were practicing feminists 20 or 30 years before the word .
We were discussing this yesterday.
One woman I work with claims that the word feminist actually has a history
I think in its current news, it really is within the last 50 or 20 years.
I think so, but maybe she meant the theory had it.
Yeah, but she signed a few with it.
But they were suffragettes.
I mean, that was another word.
That was a whole other different thing.
Not the only thing they were struggling for, although it's... There were basic rights in those days, not just... Property rights, in a way.
I mean, basic human rights.
But you look at the books that you've written.
Well, Marvel has written about 23 biographies and more weeks.
Well, you've done a lot of work up in my neck of the woods, I noticed.
In fact, I have the Concord Public Library's deaccession copy of Dickens Goodly Romania.
Oh, really?
Which amazes me why they would deaccession that, you know?
Well, it doesn't really follow me.
Well, but it kind of, it kind of thrills me that maybe, you know, who might have handled that?
That's true.
I have a deaccession copy of the Portsmouth, New Hampshire Public Library's copy of House of the Seven Gables.
That's wonderful.
And that's five dollars for it.
That's true.
Well, my first biography was The Life of Margaret Fuller, and that's going to be reprinted with the editions.
Let's go back to the Frank Wesley thing now.
How do you know?
Well, that's a wonderful story, really.
I don't mean to steal it away from you, but... When we were working, when I was doing a biography of Louisa May-Alfit, that was my second biography.
Leona helped me.
She took time off from Reischner to help me.
We went to Harvard.
Oh, but before that, we had visited Carol Wilson, a great professor of Orkin and others.
Now, where was Wilson from?
Carol Atwood Wilson.
And where was she from?
Yeah.
But where was she from?
He was from Carol.
He was from New York.
He was an attorney.
He was also a Guggenheim trustee, which is part of the story.
And he was a fine collector, fine scholar.
Anyway, we visited him.
He showed us his treasures.
And as we left, he said, Mr. Stern, you should get yourself a Guggenheim fellowship.
Remember, he was a trustee to finish your biography.
And Ms.
Rastendale said to me, I know you're interested in written history.
And we all suspect that Louisa Mayorka wrote sensational thrillers under some pseudonym.
Find out the pseudonym and find the stories.
So that was in the back of our minds.
We went up to Harvard, and we were going through these mountains of family paintings there.
Leona's got one pile in front of her.
I have a pile in front of her.
And all of a sudden, in this silent,
sacrosanct atmosphere.
She had come upon five letters from an Austin publisher, two dearness authors.
We would like more stories from you under the pseudonym of A.M.
Barnard or any other man's name you want to take.
Stories like Behind the Mask or A Woman's Power, V.V.
or The Marvel Woman, etc., etc., etc.
Waiting for you to go and find it.
Right there.
Nobody had ever looked at it.
If they had, I think that Cheney knew about it, but that she, of course, turned it down.
Everything had to be a whole sensation for her.
This was not in the image of America's best loved author of juvenile.
Isn't that fascinating?
So, with the name of his jams, the flag of IU here.
There are lots of little incidents involved here that I don't want to go into.
I published an article.
Leona Grotian wrote, which appeared in the B.S.A.
papers, announcing that this was the author's pseudonym.
She reprinted the letters, and she named the stories.
And all of a sudden, these things become very collectible, don't they?
Oh, wow.
And Carol Atwood Wilson applauded.
He was delighted.
And a lot of scholars said, what a nice piece of work.
And there, for 30 years, it rested that article in the BSA papers.
No, the BSA... I can get a copy of this.
I can get this in harmony.
I think Leona maybe has an extra copy for you.
I may have.
Don't worry about it.
Yeah, the story's wonderful.
Nobody pursued it.
Leona didn't pursue it.
I didn't pursue it.
My biography came out mentioning this, but just mentioning it.
And then we had read some of these stories and realized how damned they were.
You talk about feminism.
Behind a mask or a woman's power, this is feminism emblazoned.
And Vivi was such a horrible, evil woman, but she triumphs in the end.
Wonderful feminism.
And delicious stories.
Wonderful characterizations.
Okay.
30 years later, I woke up one morning, and I said to Leona, you know, they've reprinted, they are reprinting everything under the sun now, but they never reprinted those Louisa Alton stories.
I'm going to reprint them.
Isn't that great?
And it took a lot of work, of course, getting the copies and all that.
But Mauro put out a book of four of them.
The book was called Behind the Mask.
This was followed by a sequel the next year called Plots and Counterplots.
Is this fairly recent?
This was in the 70s.
I can give you one.
I think I have one extra.
I can find it.
Two years ago, Little Brown brought out the third collection called The Double Life, and Greenwood is bringing out a fourth collection next year called Freaks of Genius.
This is old.
They're all new.
Now, I tell you how... So, because... Because Liana discovered the pseudonym, but now this is followed by anonymous stories of her.
Now, how do you find, how do you prove an anonymous story is by somebody?
That's hard.
And when you've got proof that it's her pseudonym... How do you do that?
We were editing the journals.
That's a wonderful stuff.
And the journals are out now, but we were editing them, and we started...
At the end of each year, she's got a list of stories she wrote and what she got paid for.
The freak of a genius.
The first place we look, of course, is Lesley's because we know by this time that she's had a long relationship with Lesley's magazine.
And they're wonderful stories.
You see, this is so important for me, because here you are doing precisely what I'm trying to demonstrate.
You are preserving, discovering, purpose, and preserving.
And presenting another side of this really very remarkable woman, both together, Dick and Oliver.
I'm a fellow at the AAS a week and a half ago.
I know Victor Birch.
Have you ever heard of him?
Victor Birch.
He's a delightful man.
I just met him.
Hell no.
Well, I've never met him, but we have corresponded for Maddie and Victor Birch.
And in connection with flower things, he came up with so much information from me.
Great.
He's going to be in my book.
He's going to be in.
I would hope so.
Literary detective.
If it's written, somebody wrote it.
That's his motto.
That's right.
His motto is, if it's written, somebody wrote it.
He just called it Algin, another Algin.
Yeah, I guess the Algin.
He wants to call himself bibliotech now.
Bibliotech now.
Bibliographical detective.
Yeah, well, he's 66.
I asked him how old he is, and he told me.
But his story is great.
He never had an undergraduate degree.
No, sure.
Oh, this is... Oh, so much information, yes.
He's a lovely man.
And he sent me information about it, too.
He said he's fantastic.
He said he's going to do a... Yeah, he said he got a bit grand if I heard of mine.
Oh, well, I'll call him.
I'm going to talk to him next week.
Well, give him my... I will.
I will, yes.
Anyway, he's telling me he's got a $50,000 grant.
If I heard this right, I was on the phone, to do a flick on the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, which is, I don't think, quite up his alley.
I'll ask him very discreetly.
Unless he was pulling my leg, I don't know.
Wow, he's working now on Horatio Alger.
I know.
He just did this little article.
And this is what he collects.
And he collects, and he said, you've got to come to my house.
His house is falling, it's filled to bursting with magazines, pulp magazines and science fiction magazines.
This VV that I mentioned was published as a dying novel.
And you know what else he collects, which made me mention his name?
He mentioned Alcock writing these, what did you call them, not thrillers, but sensational.
Well, he said he has specialized in determining which authors
wrote soft pornography so they could survive i mean there's pseudonymous names and i said could you name some of them for me no i can't because you know they wouldn't like it i said you mean they're still alive he said they're all alive but uh he said it is important to identify who they are
and yeah i certainly don't collect it for the titillation that it might may or may not offer but but to document you haven't mentioned this to me i suppose yeah well i i can be pretty probing and then uh we're going to get together and talk about this but this is important you are it is important for the literary detective or whatever you want to call yourself to go out and determine
What it is.
If it's written, somebody wrote it.
That's right.
It's a rather crude phrase.
And in Orphan's case, the stories are worth preserving.
They're wonderful stories.
They have literary merit.
Not just biographical, bibliographic merit.
They're very good page terms.
That's great.
See, I'm making connections now.
The more people I talk to, by the way, things come together.
I've got about 100 interviews, by the way.
I shouldn't ask this question.
When are you going to turn in?
Well, I'm under contract to turn in the manuscript in March of 1991.
What deal is that?
It was a big operator.
He didn't buy one book.
He bought a collection.
Yeah.
And he was Mr. Wright's right hand.
He was Mr. His ad in the Pegasus of the Garage.
He was probably QVAL.
That was it.
But what's curious is why Harry Ransom, he would be the exclusive agent for Texas.
I don't know.
She was a difficult little lady, but she was a wonderful woman in Montefiore.
She really made Montefiore.
There was a woman who had no education, but really became... She was friends with Montefiore.
And she helped establish their collection.
I talked to Kirschenbaum, not because he's a great dealer.
I was astonished to read that he's 95.
He's 95.
He's 95 years old, and he has attended every auction since Hope.
He claims to have attended the 1912 Sessions of the Hope.
Well, I talked to him and, you know, I got his impressions of John Quinn and Jerome Kern, you know, and... Well, again, it's him talking.
He could have been, actually, I think I was...
It goes back to the history.
Everybody wore a tuxedo.
I mean, it was hard-fledged entirely.
And it was very exciting and very interesting.
How good was Newton's stuff?
Yeah, we were fine.
Johnson, the United States, mostly Samuel Johnson, and certainly Englishman.
Recently,
Maria Scumman, Nick Hathbar, a copy of Mary Waltoncraft, Vindication of Enlightenment, the first edition of September.
It turned out to be the A. Edward Newton copy.
It was the copy that we had seen sold at the A. Edward Newton sale, sold to the Clemens Library.
bought by Fleming for the Clements Library, with a note from Fleming to the then librarian, who was a woman, saying, this is a very nice book for a lady, something like that.
I think he had fetched $20 at the sale, and his commission, $2.
We had it.
It was an original book uncut.
They had been described as movies.
shaky or loose.
By the time we got it, they were lost, but they were there and could be repaired.
And made of a book.
It was sold at the last... It had been deaccessioned by some white players.
Stupidly, I don't know.
It was sold to an English dealer.
And when was this?
Oh, this was this past book fan.
Oh, really?
Okay.
It was very recent, yeah.
There's a Latin expression, Father of the Bellet, Haben, Sunds.
Books have their own fates.
That's wonderful.
And you assist them in achieving their destiny.
In between boards, I always wanted to do it.
I wrote the history of the board.
I took around Mr. Fraser Farley.
From the moment he conceived the book and went to England to write it, his first publication in Strasbourg, and the fate of that copy, two modern times.
And I had the most marvelous time.
Because, of course, this book, the genuine copy, never existed.
But it shows what could happen to the book.
The vicissitudes of a book.
and the heights of a book, the excitement of a pause, until it's finally acquired, we hope for it.
Sure, the book, that way, becomes sort of a microcosm of the whole world.
Well, I can trace this history.
I just couldn't do anything with it, so I did.
I had a marvelous time, and it landed up in these panels.
How do you feel about, I mean, you do think that books should find a permanent home at some point?
No.
But she did say that the book ultimately should ultimately find a permanent home, but do you think that they should continue on their travels?
They should continue on their travels.
Well, yeah, they're two schools.
Some people feel everybody should have had something.
Perspective, ah, I should have pleasure.
In the moment, the books are put into law first because they never command.
But they do.
But you think it's permanent.
You hope it's never permanent.
There's nothing permanent.
Well, there's a story that I'm going to use about Leslie Rosenwald when he bought that vicious anti-Semitic thing.
He said that's the only time he ever told Rosenbach that price was no object.
And this was in 1933 because he didn't want the Nazis to get it.
And this is this horrible anti-Semitic thing that... Oh, the Margarita?
I think it was Simon and Trent, something like that.
There was a book in German, and it's only a Margarita.
No, this is another one.
What happened is he bought it, Rosenbach got it.
He gave it to the Jewish Historical League in Walther, Massachusetts, which just last year sold it to Taylor Lent after 50 years.
It came down here, $165,000.
Fortunately, the buyer gave it to Yeshiva.
But my point is, Rosenwald hated this so much, yet he still bought it.
Why didn't he destroy it?
This is a sign of the true collector.
He can't destroy it.
That's the point.
He who destroys a good book destroys reason itself.
John Milton.
I guess the Bradley-Martin does provide an example, an interesting illustration where the ornithological books perhaps should have been kept together as a collection, because they were unique.
But nothing is permanent.
You have to realize that nothing is permanent.
Larger is deaccession, and they're red, and I've seen it turn into again.
They can hope for permanence.
Didn't that happen if Nicholas Barker was telling me about a case where Walter Jackson, I guess, at Harvard.
William Jackson.
William Jackson actually took a copy of a book that was perfect, and he allowed it to be sold because he said it's too perfect for a collection.
I got to check this out.
Well, he said, well, apparently the book now has found its way back to Princeton.
Jackson was a snob collector.
Oh, but he was a very close girl.
But he had to have the best.
He only wanted the best.
I mean, we sold Jackson.
Jackson was a customer.
We knew Jackson.
He was a marvelous customer.
He was a snob, and there are snobs.
Now, Wing was a marvelous human being.
He was a mensch.
He was your friend.
He talked your language.
And he didn't fuss about it.
I mean, you go to Wings' office, which is about this big.
You couldn't even sit down.
He would say, oh, throw some books on the floor.
Put a chair on the folio.
That's what he said.
He was then working on his SPC.
And all the slips were in the shoeboxes.
This was Wings.
This is the difference in what?
In librarians.
And the whole, and everything's highly polished.
With wings off us.
Such a mess.
He said, oh, I've got a life.